[[!meta title="Migrating from other databases, namely Access"]]

This article will show you how to migrate a given Access Database to zetbox.

# Setting up the Migration Project

The Project Wizard has created a project and all it's configuration. These settings/checks should be made:

zbPublishAll.cmd: Enable export of schema migration
[[!format cmd """
rem export SchemaMigration projects
Zetbox.Cli.exe %config% -export ..\..\Data\SchemaMigrationProject.xml -schemamodules SchemaMigration
IF ERRORLEVEL 1 GOTO FAIL
"""]]

zbDeployAll.cmd: Enable import of schema migration
[[!format cmd """
Zetbox.Cli.exe %config% -import ..\..\Data\SchemaMigrationProject.xml
IF ERRORLEVEL 1 GOTO FAIL
"""]]

Migration configuration xml: Check SQL settings
[[!format xml """
  <Server StartServer="true">
    <ConnectionStrings>
      <Database Name="zetbox" Schema="POSTGRESQL" Provider="NHibernate.Dialect.PostgreSQL82Dialect">Server=localhost;Port=5432;Database=myproject;User Id=zbox</Database>
      <Database Name="MyProjectMigration_dest" Schema="POSTGRESQL" Provider="">Server=localhost;Port=5432;Database=myproject_staging;User Id=zbox;</Database>
      <Database Name="MyProjectMigration_src" Schema="OLEDB" Provider="">Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0;Data Source=.\MyProject.mdb</Database>
    </ConnectionStrings>
"""]]

# Setting up Schema Migration
Open zetbox and go to the SchemaMigration module. Create a SchemaMigrationProject. 

[[!img CreateMigrationProject1.png]]
[[!img CreateMigrationProject2.png]]

In the migration project, create a statging database. Your origin data will be copied to this staging database first. The migration process will use the stating database as a source.

[[!img CreateStagingDatabase.png]]

* _ConnectionStringKey for Destination_ is the key in your config file for the *Staging Database*. Remember: The process will copy your origin data to the staging database first, so this is the destination for now.
* _Schema in Destination_ is the schema in your staging database where your source should be copied. This is usefull when there is more than one origin source. The staging database remains the same, but the destination schema will change.
* _ConnectionStringKey for Source_ is the key in your config file for your origin data.

Two Guids has to be fixed in the migration project. These are the export guids of the migration project and the staging database.

[[!img FixGuids.png]]

Now the migration process can be started to fill the staging database

[[!format cmd """
cd bin\debug
MyProject.Migrate.exe --reloadstaging
"""]]
