[Deployment]Deployment
======================

This section describes the possible deployment strategies.

this section is a subject to change

Continuous Integration Server
-----------------------------

The *Continuous Integration Server* does a publish in a directory
structure. This directory structure is transformed by a *fetch* script
into the designated directory structure.

It’s not recommended to use the *Continuous Integration Servers*
structure directly. The next section will discuss the fetching process
and the designated directory structure.

Fetching and Destination Directory Structure
--------------------------------------------

The fetching script is responsible for

-   Creating the directory structure

-   Fetching all Assemblies and putting them in the right destination
    directory

-   Copying all app configuration files to the right directories

The directory structure on the deployment server should look like this:

-   AppConfigs

-   bin

    -   Bootstrapper

    -   Client

        -   Client

            -   App.Zetbox

            -   Core

            -   Core.Generated

            -   WPF

            -   WinForms

        -   Common

            -   App.Zetbox

            -   Core

            -   Core.Generated

        -   Zetbox.Client.WPF.exe

        -   Zetbox.Client.WPF.exe.config

        -   Zetbox.Client.Forms.exe

        -   Zetbox.Client.Forms.exe.config

    -   Server

        -   Common

            -   App.Zetbox

            -   Core

            -   Core.Generated

        -   Server

            -   App.Zetbox

            -   Core

            -   Core.Generated

            -   EF

            -   EF.Generated

            -   NH

            -   NH.Generated

        -   Zetbox.Server.Service.exe

        -   Zetbox.Server.Service.exe.config

-   Configs

-   DocumentStore

-   inetpub

    -   App\_Data

    -   App\_GlobalResources

    -   App\_Themes

    -   bin

    -   Bootstrapper

    -   Common

        -   App.Zetbox

        -   Core

        -   Core.Generated

    -   Server

        -   App.Zetbox

        -   Core

        -   Core.Generated

        -   EF

        -   EF.Generated

        -   NH

        -   NH.Generated

-   logs

-   Packages

-   deploy.ps1

-   fetch.ps1

### Root Directory

The deployment script, responsible for upgrading the servers database

The fetch script, responsible for creating the directory structure and
fetching all assemblies and configuration templates

### AppConfigs

This directory contains all app configuration files needed by the
executing assemblies. E.g. in the *Zetbox.Server.Service.exe.config* all
WCF Service stuff can be configured. In *Zetbox.Client.WPF.exe.config*
all WCF Proxy stuff can be configured.

The fetch script will copy those configuration files into the desired
directories, right beside their executalables.

So this is the place where all app specific configuration has to be
defined.

Besides WCF stuff, those configuration can be also found in those files:

-   log4net

-   WCF

-   Assembly Bindings

-   Database provider registration

The web.config is not located here, but this may change in the future

### Configs

This directory contains all Zetbox configuration files. They are located
by the executalable by probing

-   the given command line parameter

-   then the *zenv* environment variable plus executalable name

-   then each directory up to the *Configs* directory, still with the
    executalable name

-   at the end by looking for *DefaultConfig.xml* in the configs
    directory

### bin

The bin directory contains all assemblies used by Zetbox, divided by
theire use (Bootstrapper, Client or Server). The *Client* and *Server*
directories contains sub directories to split Client/Server and Common
parts. Those directories have for each Application (=Zetbox Module) and
Modules (not Zetbox Modules!) a individual sub directory.

The naming of Application (=Zetbox Module) should be:

App.\<ModuleName\>

*Core* contains all core assemblies like Zetbox.API and all other
assemblies that are referenced by default (log4net e.g.).

*Core.Generated* contains all genereated code. Code Generation is done
by the *Continuous Integration Server* so those assemblies will be
copied by the fetch script.

This is a topic of discussion

*Bootstrapper* contains only one executalable. The Boostrapper itself
which is downloading the whole client application with its configuration
from an HTTP Server via REST.

Deployment on a Linux Server
----------------------------

On Linux the following packages are needed:

-   Mono 2.10 - master

-   Apache 2

-   mod\_mono

-   many other…

### Apache configuration

-   Install Apache

-   install mod\_mono

-   turn off KeepAlive - the .NET HTTP Client won’t talk to Apache
    correctly

-   enable/configure your security model

-   ensure that the *TrustedBasicAuthenticationModule* is enabled.

The Apache Server is responsible for authentication. The ZToolbox server
trusts Apache and uses the passed identity (through the HTTP Header).

Deployment on a Windows Server
------------------------------
