Graphical User Interface
========================

Like other subsystems, the GUI core is designed to be platform
independent. Therefore only the *outermost* shell contains toolkit
specific code.

Architecture
------------

The GUI is modeled after the Model-View-ViewModel architecture. The
*Model* represents the underlying data structures and business logic. It
is provided by the generated classes from the actual datamodel.

*View Models* provide display specific functionality like formatting,
transient state holding and implementing the user’s possible actions.
They always inherit from *Zetbox.Client.Presentables.ViewModel*. Common
implementations reside in the *Zetbox.Client.Presentables* namespace.

*Control Kinds* are representing a way how *ViewModels* would like to be
displayed. For example:

* as a TextBox
* as a DropDownList
* as a CheckBox
* as a RadioButtonList

*Control Kinds* are simply a sort of enumeration items. They do not
provide any services. *ControlKinds* can be put into a hierarchy. That
enables the infrastructure to choose another view if a certian
*ControlKind* is not implemented in a Toolkit.

Finally, *Views* (editors and displays) are the actual components taking
care of showing content to the user and converting the users keypresses
and clicks into calls on the view models interface. Views are
toolkit[^4] specific and reside in the toolkit’s respective assembly.

This architecture decouples the actual functionality of the Model and
the View Model completly from the inner workings of a toolkit and
thereby maximise the reuse of code between different clients.

[[!img GUI_Relation_MVVM.png class="small"]]

Plumbing
--------

The three layers are connected through two sets of descriptors and
*ControlKinds*. The *ViewModelDescriptor*s contain information about the
available View Models and their preferred way of being displayed.

[[!format cs """
public interface ViewModelDescriptor
{
    Zetbox.App.GUI.ControlKind DefaultKind; 
	Zetbox.App.GUI.ControlKind DefaultDisplayKind; 
	Zetbox.App.GUI.ControlKind DefaultGridCellDisplayKind; 
	Zetbox.App.GUI.ControlKind DefaultGridCellKind;

    string Description;
	
    Zetbox.App.Base.TypeRef ViewModelRef;
}
"""]]
	
*ViewDescriptor*s contain information about controls which are capable
of displaying certian *ControlKinds*.

[[!format cs """
public interface ViewModelDescriptor 
{
    Zetbox.App.GUI.ControlKind ControlKind; 
	Zetbox.App.Base.TypeRef ControlRef; 
	Zetbox.App.GUI.Toolkit Toolkit
}
"""]]

### Some implemented ViewModels

[[!table header="no" data="""
*DataObjectViewModel*             | represent a complete data object; provide standardised access to properties; provide non-standard ViewModels with additional functionality; selected via *ObjectClass.DefaultViewModelDescriptor*
*BaseValueViewModel*s             | represent a specific piece of simple data (strings, DateTimes); Data can be the a Propertiy, MethodResults or simply a Value; Properties and Parameter of Methods selects their *ViewModel* via their *ValueModelDescriptor* Property;
*ActionViewModel*                 | represent a Method which can be invoked in the UI.
*ObjectEditor.WorkspaceViewModel* | This ViewModel implements all featurs of and Object Editor. This includes Cancel, Save or selecting the current item.
"""]]

### Control Kind

The *ControlKind* specifies the toolkit-independent kind or type of
control that should display a given Presentable. While the View
specifies the Control Kind it implements the Presentable requests a
specific Kind to be displayed via the
*PresentableModelDescriptor.DefaultControlKind* value.

In special situations this default value can be overridden. For example,
the metadata of a property contains a *RequestedControlKind* which is
used instead of the *DefaultControlKind* when present. If there is no
View matching the requested Kind, the infrastructure may either fall
back to the default control kind, or use a similar control kind from
higher up in the hierarchy.

Typical kinds of controls:

[[!table header="no" data="""
WorkspaceWindow       | the top-level control within which all user interaction happens
SelectionTaskDialog   | a dialog letting the user select something from a longer list of items
ObjectView            | display the modeled object in full
ObjectListEntry       | display the modeled object as item in a list
TextEntry             | lets the user edit a property as text
IntegerSlider         | lets the user edit a number with a slider
YesNoCheckbox         | a simple yes/no checkbox
YesNoOtherText        | radio buttons allowing one to select either "yes", "no" or a TextEntry field
ExtendedYesNoCheckbox | a checkbox with additional text as label
"""]]

The kind of a control is identified by the *ControlKind*’s class. The
hierarchy between different kinds of controls is modeled with
inheritance.

### Views

Their descriptors list the available Views by Toolkit and which
ControlKind they represent. *View Descriptors* can define which
*ViewModel*s (or Interfaces to ViewModels) are supported.

Resolving ViewModels
--------------------

*ViewModels* are resolved by the *IViewModelFactory*

[[!format cs """
public interface IViewModelFactory
{
    void ShowModel(ViewModel mdl, bool activate); 
	void ShowModel(ViewModel mdl, Zetbox.App.GUI.ControlKind kind, bool activate);

    void CreateTimer(TimeSpan tickLength, Action action); 
	string GetSourceFileNameFromUser(params string[] filter); 
	string GetDestinationFileNameFromUser(string filename, params string[] filter);
    Toolkit Toolkit { get; }

    // Create Models 
	TModelFactory CreateViewModel\<TModelFactory\>() where TModelFactory : class; 
	TModelFactory CreateViewModel\<TModelFactory\>(Zetbox.API.IDataObject obj) where TModelFactory : class; 
	TModelFactory CreateViewModel\<TModelFactory\>(Zetbox.API.ICompoundObject obj) where TModelFactory : class; 
	TModelFactory CreateViewModel\<TModelFactory\>(Zetbox.App.Base.Property p) where TModelFactory : class; 
	TModelFactory CreateViewModel\<TModelFactory\>(Zetbox.App.Base.BaseParameter p) where TModelFactory : class; 
	TModelFactory CreateViewModel\<TModelFactory\>(Zetbox.App.Base.Method m) where TModelFactory : class; 
	TModelFactory CreateViewModel\<TModelFactory\>(System.Type t) where TModelFactory : class;

    // IMultipleInstancesManager 
	void OnIMultipleInstancesManagerCreated(Zetbox.API.IZetboxContext ctx, IMultipleInstancesManager workspace); 
	void OnIMultipleInstancesManagerDisposed(Zetbox.API.IZetboxContext ctx, IMultipleInstancesManager workspace);
}
"""]]
	
*ViewModel*s can be created directly if the requested *ViewModel* is
known. Some *ObjectClasses* (ObjectClass, Property, Method, Parameter,
etc.) can declare a more specific *ViewModel*. Use a more specific
*CreateViewModel* overload in such a case.

The most obvious example is *Property*. There is a need for different
*ViewModel*s for a *StringProperty* vs. *ObjectReferenceProperty*. Each
*ViewModel* for displaying Properties derives from a very basic
*BaseValueViewModel*.

[[!table header="no" data="""
IntProperty             | is displayed by a NullableStructValueViewModel of type int
BoolProperty            | is displayed by a NullableStructValueViewModel of type bool
DecimalProperty         | is displayed by a NullableStructValueViewModel of type decimal
StringProperty          | is displayed by a ClassValueViewModel of type string or MultiLineStringValueViewModel
DateTimeProperty        | is displayed by a NullableDateTimePropertyViewModel
ObjectReferenceProperty | is displayed by a ObjectReferenceViewModel, ObjectCollectionViewModel or ObjectListViewModel
"""]]
	
Create a specific *ViewModel* by calling:

[[!format cs """
mdlFactory
    .CreateViewModel<WorkspaceViewModel.Factory>()
	.Invoke(ctx);
"""]]

Create a *ViewModel* for a *Property* by calling:

[[!format cs """
ViewModelFactory
    .CreateViewModel<BaseValueViewModel.Factory>(prop)
	.Invoke(DataContext, prop.GetValueModel(Object));
"""]]

Create a *ViewModel* for a *IDataObject* by calling:

[[!format cs """
ViewModelFactory
    .CreateViewModel<DataObjectViewModel.Factory>(obj)
	.Invoke(DataContext, obj);
"""]]

The *ViewModelFactory* will look up the *IDataObject*s type and tries to
find it’s *ObjectClass*. Then it looks up the *ViewModelDescriptor* and
creates the *ViewModel*.

Using ViewModels
----------------

### DataObjectViewModel

The *DataObjectViewModel* wraps a whole *IDataObject* in a ViewModel.

The most important Properties and Methods are:

[[!table header="no" data="""
PropertyModels                  | A read only list of all known *BaseValueViewModels* fetched from the *ObjectClass*.
OnPropertyModelsCreated()       | Called after the *PropertyModels* list has been created. In a derived, custom *ViewModel* this event can be used for additional *ValueViewModel* setup routines. E.g. adding custom commands to *ObjectReference\*ViewModels*.
PropertyModelsByName            | Dictionary of *BaseValueViewModels* with the property name as the key.
OnPropertyModelsByNameCreated() | Called after the *PropertyModelsByName* dictionary has been created.
PropertyGroups                  | A read only collection of property groups. See *CreatePropertyGroups* for more information.
CreatePropertyGroups            | Property groups are created based on the properties summary tags. Due to the fact, that properties can have more than one summary tag, properties may appear in more than one property group. Properties with no summary tags appears in the “Uncategorised” group. Note, that currently summary tags may not contain spaces as the space is defined as the seperator. You can override this method to add custom property groups.
PropertyGroupsByName            | Dictionary of *PropertyGroups* with the group name as the key.
IsReadOnly                      | Specifies, that the underlying object should be read only. This sets every property read only.
"""]]

Example for CreatePropertyGroups override:
[[!format cs """
protected override List<PropertyGroupViewModel> CreatePropertyGroups()
{
    var result = base.CreatePropertyGroups();

    var relListMdl = ViewModelFactory
	                     .CreateViewModel<InstanceListViewModel.Factory>()
						 .Invoke(DataContext, 
						         () => DataContext, 
								 typeof(Relation).GetObjectClass(FrozenContext), 
								 () => DataContext.GetQuery<Relation>());

    var lblMdl = ViewModelFactory
	                 .CreateViewModel<LabeledViewContainerViewModel.Factory>()
					 .Invoke(DataContext, "Relations", "", relListMdl); 
	var propGrpMdl = ViewModelFactory
	                     .CreateViewModel<SinglePropertyGroupViewModel.Factory>()
						 .Invoke(DataContext, "Relations", new ViewModel[] { lblMdl }); 
	result.Add(propGrpMdl);
    return result;
}
"""]]

### ValueViewModel
TODO!

### Highlighting

Every *ViewModel* supports highlighting. Highlighting is the visual
representation of an object state. It is the *ViewModel* decision how to
translate the business state to the visual state. Therefore, the
*ViewModel* exposes an property *Highlight*.

public class Highlight : INotifyPropertyChanged HighlightState State
get; set; string GridBackground get; set; string GridForeground get;
set; FontStyle GridFontStyle get; set; string PanelBackground get; set;

Visual states (*HighlightState*) are a fixed enumeration, described as
the most common verbs like Good, Neutral, Bad, Archived, Deactivated,
Active, Output, Input, Calculation, Info, Warning, Error, Fatal, Note, …

Each of this *HighlightState* will be translated by the *Toolkit* into
it final visual representation. E.g. Warning will be rendered in Grid
with an yellow background color and a black foreground color. Error will
be rendered in a Grid with an red background color and a white
foreground color. This color schema makes it easier for the user to
identify an object business state quickly. Therefore a *Toolkit* should
not implement another color schema.

Sometimes, there is a need to use custom colors. E.g. if the sales
volume should be formatted from green (high) smoothly to red (low).
Something like a balanced score card. In this case the *ViewModel*
should return custom colors in the *GridBackground*, *GridForeground*,
etc. properties.

Thus, that every ViewModel supports highlighting it is possible to color
the whole line plus color some cell individually.

The *HighlightState* is not only used in Grids and Lists. It is also
used in panels. The color schema may be slightly different from the
girds color schema. E.G. it makes no sense to color a panels background
in a light gray color to signal the Deactivated state. It should be a
darker gray. If the panels background color should be customized
override the *PanelBackground* property.

Implementation
--------------

### Implementing a ViewModel
TODO!

### Implementing a WPF View
TODO!

States of an Input Control
--------------------------

*Input controls* are Views receiving input from the user. The following
state diagram explains the possible basic states of the underlying
*InputViewModel*:

An InputViewModel has two distinct dimensions along which it modifies
its behaviour. One is whether or not it currently has the focus[^1]. The
other dimension is whether or not there are outstanding (partial)
modifications to the Value.

[[!table header="no" data="""
B   | The ViewModel is *blurred*. That is, it does not have the focus. User input will not reach the control.
F   | The ViewModel is *focused*. That is, it has the focus. The control will be notified of the user’s next input.
IF  | The ViewModel is *implicitely focused*. This states is reached by signalling user input without first signalling a focusing event. It is a convenient shortcut for Toolkits which do not track the concept of focus. Since this state is unaware of the user’s focus, it has to bubble changes to the canonically formatted Value immediately to the View, possibly disrupting the user’s input.
UV  | The View should display the *unmodified Value*. This is the common state when no input was received or all input was processed successfully.
PUI | The View should display a *partial user input*. If the user cannot input a valid value atomically, the ViewModel will enter this state to keep track of the partial value to add more input from the user until a valid value is formed.
WM  | The ViewModel is currently *writing to the Model*. Change notifications from the Model in this state are generated by the writing ViewModel and thus must be ignored locally.
"""]]
	
There are several events that determine the actual state of the
InputViewModel.

[[!table header="no" data="""
F   | The ViewModel receives *Focus*.
B1  | The ViewModel looses *Focus*. Since this signals the user loosing interest in further editing this Value, a change in the FormattedValue is signalled[^2] to update the View to the canonical representation of the Value.
B2  | The ViewModel looses *Focus*. Since the user has still a pending partial input, the ViewModel expects the user to return and continue editing.
MC1 | The Model is *changed* by a third party. This might be due to changes from the business logic or via other ViewModels. In any case the View should be signalled to update its display to the new Value.
MC2 | The Model is *changed* by a third party. The user is currently editing the Value, so changes there should be ignored. In most cases this constitutes a programming error, as no code should try to change values while the user is editing them.
MC3 | The Model is *changed* by the ViewModel. The View should be signalled to update its display to the new Value. Since this is in reaction to user input, this might not display a canonicalized value
PI  | The user enters *partial input*. The ViewModel will store this until the user completes or aborts[^3] her edit.
VI  | The user enters *complete input*. The ViewModel accepts the input as valid and will proceed to write it back to the Model.
"""]]
	

Asynchronous Loading
--------------------

Not yet implemented.

To facilitate low-latency user interfaces, the ViewModels should
implement a thin proxy layer to delegate all potential blocking
operations onto a worker thread. To keep programming this layer easy,
there are a few helper classes and a few constraints on the available
interface mechanisms as well as a consistent contract over all compliant
ViewModels.

There are only three ways to communicate over the *thread gap*:

1.  accessing a property

2.  calling a *void* function (with not *out* or *ref* parameters)

3.  having an *EventHandler* called

All compliant ViewModels provide a *IsLoading* property that signifies
whether any background processing is active. While this property is
true, any value read from a property may be stale and/or about to be
replaced. Changes to the visible value of a property are always reported
via the *PropertyChanged* event from the *INotifyPropertyChanged*
interface. This should suffice for enabling binding frameworks to show
current values to the user: When reading a value from a property, a
cached value is returned immediately and optionally a refresh is
triggered, which in turn may cause a PropertyChanged event a little bit
later.

In the case of time-dependent values, the ViewModel has to take care to
establish a periodic refresh timer[^5] which triggers PropertyChanged
events when new values arrive.

Similarily, methods called on the ViewModel do not actually do their
work immediately, but delegate to the background worker thread. Results
either show up automatically through changed properties and the
PropertyChanged event or via specialized events.

### Thread Safety

The ViewModel is designed to be accessed from a single UI thread. Due to
the low latency of the public interface, this should pose no problem.
The ViewModel internally takes care of all synchronization with the
worker thread. Due to the asynchronicity of the underlying data it is
quite possible that the values of properties change while a method on
the UI thread is currently executing.

### Automatic Generation

Due to the restricted set of operations allowed, the proxy can and
should be automatically generated, freeing the ViewModel from the
intricacies of synchronizing and delegating across thread boundaries.
Special needs like callback parameters and time-dependent values have to
be communicated via special Attributes.

[^1]: usually the keyboard focus
[^2]: If the user has not modified the Value, this signalling could be optimized away. Since the canonical representation should always be on display unless the user is currently editing this is not deemed an issue at this time.
[^3]: Canceling is currently not supported
[^4]: Toolkits are GUI libraries like WPF, GTK\# or Windows Forms but can also be implemented by more complex providers such as ASP.NET.
[^5]: Todo: such a timer should be provided by the infrastructure for platform dependent refreshing
